Once around Ixion.
This is another in my series of close
looks at individual objects out there in
the outer solar system. And this object
was discovered in an unusual way by the
deep ecliptic survey in 2001 lurking in
the constellation of Scorpius. Now
Scorpius is of course the direction
towards the center of our galaxy. So
there are a tremendous number of stars
in this direction. Quite tricky then to
pick out a small moving object.
Designated 2001 for the year of
discovery. KX76
and been tracked back to earlier images
all the way back to 1982 giving us 18
years worth of orbital arc to be able to
figure out the parameters of its track
around the solar system. And so you can
see the telescopes that we used there in
the deep ecliptic survey looking for
very faint objects indeed. Now Ixion is
a Greek mythological character, the son
of Aries. He was the king of the Lapiths
and it's a long story with Ixion. There
was marriage, missing dowies, horse
theft, murder, exile, rescue by Zeus,
lust, thunderbolts, and finally being
bound to a burning wheel for all
eternity. So quite a story to this
character. Um, and a great name for a
mystery object in the outer solar
system.
It's marked in green in terms of its
orbital path here taking 251 years going
around the sun from a close approach a
perihelion of 30 astronomical units out
to 50 AU. Um so actually 30 AU is the
distance of Neptune. So you can see that
its orbit actually comes within the uh
blue line where Neptune goes. Um, and
that is something that Pluto also does.
And it is indeed a Plutino. It's in a
3:2 orbital relationship. So Neptune
does three orbits for every two that
Ixium does. And that oddnumbered ratio
of one and a half to one, if you like,
means it keeps meeting Neptune in
opposite sides of the sun and getting
alternating gravitational tugs from it.
um that keeps it in a long-term stable
position. Now, it's very faint, nearly
magnitude 20, 19.8.
A very challenging target indeed. And
this is the best image that we have of
Ixion from the Hubble Space Telescope.
Now, there are no moons in this image as
far as we can see. I think the bright
dot that you can see at the bottom there
is a background star, but there's
something going on around it. Is that a
dust disc? We're not sure.
What we can estimate from our studies is
that it uh is quite big. Originally, it
was thought to be 1,400 kilometers
across, which would have made it a very
large object indeed. Uh one of the
larger of the Kiper Bell's objects. Now,
we know it's 710 kilometers, so half
that. And that puts it fourth in the
group the plutinos that orbit around in
this same manner in this 3 to2 lock with
Neptune because we haven't managed to
locate a moon.
We can't tell the mass. We use the orbit
of moons like Sharon around Pluto and
the orbit of the moon there around Orcus
to discover the mass of the primary
using Kepler's laws. And it's spinning
at a medium speed 12 hours. So we can
tell that by looking at the light curve
of it.
Surface wise it's very dark and very red
covered in a lot of folins. I talked
about that many times. The action of uh
radiation on water and what's called
organic clath which are where you have
uh cage-like molecules that trap others
within the center of them. If you're
interested in the chemistry of that, I
might talk about that later in another
video. But this all suggests that it is
an ancient surface and there's little
evidence of any of the resurfacing
events and the cryo vulcanism um or
impacts or anything like that at this
stage. Now it may well be that future
exploration can be possible. We might
get closer to this one and be able to
find out more about it.
Now it was imaged by New Horizons. It
was able to take photographs from a
distance of 15 astronomical units from
Ixian. And it's been suggested for an
orbiter mission. Now, that's a 25 year
long flight path because rather than a
flyby where you head route one straight
towards it with a perhaps some flyby of
Jupiter to pick up some speed, but you
can't stop because you're going so fast.
you can get there in maybe 12 or 13
years.
If you want to arrive on a much more
rounded trajectory so that you can end
up in orbit
rather than just hurtling straight path
past, you have to take a different route
and it will take a lot longer. But it
would be very very interesting to learn
more about it. And so that's a quick
whistle stop tour once around the Kiper
belt object IEN for you. So, thanks very
much for listening and I hope you've
enjoyed that one and you get to check
out some of the other CO belt objects in
this little series. Thanks again.